Our theme this month is
“Keep Seeking Great Things for Jehovah.”
It’s based on some powerful advice
that Jehovah gave to a man named Baruch.
Who was Baruch?
What can his example teach us?
And how can the divine counsel
he received help us today?
Let’s find out.
Baruch was a faithful servant of Jehovah.
He appears in the Bible book of Jeremiah
about the year 625 B.C.E.
Let’s start our journey
by reading Jeremiah 45:1:
“This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet
“spoke to Baruch the son of Neriah
“when he wrote in a book
these words dictated by Jeremiah
“in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim son of Josiah,
the king of Judah.”
Baruch served
as Jeremiah’s personal secretary.
The two worked closely together
for some 18 years,
including after the destruction
of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E.
That was certainly
a special privilege of service
during a very challenging time.
But why did Jeremiah need an assistant?
For some 23 years,
Jeremiah had been conveying a message
of judgment and hope
to God’s people in Judah.
In the year 625 B.C.E.,
it seems that Jeremiah
had been barred from the temple area
where Jehovah’s message was to be read.
At that time, Jehovah asked Jeremiah
to write His warnings in a scroll.
That’s where Baruch,
a scribe (or, secretary),
comes into the picture.
He wrote in a scroll
all the words that Jehovah had spoken
through Jeremiah up until that time
—23 years’ worth!
The following year, when the time came
for the contents of that scroll
to be read aloud in the temple courtyard,
Jeremiah asked Baruch to deliver the message.
Again, Baruch did just so.
What happened next?
When the princes of Judah
heard what Baruch had done,
they wanted to hear the message firsthand.
So Baruch read it out loud again.
“As soon as they heard [it],”
the account says
“they looked at one another in dread.”
They told Baruch: “We must certainly tell
the king all these words.”
Before doing so, they warned Baruch:
“Go and hide yourselves, you and Jeremiah,
and do not let anyone know where you are.”
Wicked King Jehoiakim was hot with anger!
He burned the scroll
and ordered that Jeremiah
and Baruch be arrested.
Now, let’s pause and think.
From what we’ve considered so far,
what can we learn from Baruch?
First, he was humble.
Many scholars believe that he belonged
to a prominent scribal family.
Yet, when the invitation came
to help Jeremiah,
Baruch “proceeded to do according to all
that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him.”
Like you, brothers and sisters,
Baruch was happy to support Jehovah’s work
and to do whatever was asked of him.
He did not let his family status
or personal goals distract him.
Because he was humble,
he put Jehovah’s will first in his life.
Baruch also demonstrated endurance.
Do you think putting 23 years’ worth
of divine messages in writing took some time?
Of course.
Baruch didn’t have a modern tool,
such as a smartphone, tablet, or computer.
It was a lot of manual work.
And imagine Baruch’s shock
when the king burned up the first scroll.
That was Jehovah’s message.
That was the scroll that Baruch
had written by hand
—hours of work up in smoke!
Jeremiah 36:32 says:
“Jeremiah then took another scroll
and gave it to Baruch . . . ,
“and at Jeremiah’s dictation
“he wrote on it all the words of the scroll
“that King Jehoiakim of Judah
had burned in the fire.
And many more words like those were added.”
Like Baruch, we too need endurance
to stick to our sacred work
when there are challenges.
Consider, too, Baruch’s courage.
He must have known how dangerous
it would be to work with Jeremiah.
Earlier, the same king
that burned up the scroll
killed another prophet of Jehovah,
Urijah, by the sword.
But Baruch fearlessly used his
professional skills and contacts
to support Jehovah’s prophet.
There’s so much we can learn
from this God-fearing man
who demonstrated humility,
endurance, and courage.
Jehovah loved Baruch, and so do we.
Of course, Baruch, like us,
confronted negative thoughts and feelings.
There was one challenge
that could have cost him dearly.
What was it?
Let’s continue the reading
at Jeremiah 45:2, 3.
And please note
Jehovah’s personal interest in Baruch.
Jeremiah 45:2, 3 says:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says
“concerning you, Baruch,
“‘You have said: “Woe to me,
“‘“for Jehovah has added grief to my pain!
“‘“I am weary from my groaning,
and I have found no resting-place.”’”
Why was Baruch feeling like that?
Was he getting tired of his assignment
or perhaps the circumstances
in which he had to perform it?
Let’s keep reading verses 4 and 5:
“You should say to him,
“‘This is what Jehovah says:
“‘“Look! What I have built up
“‘“I am tearing down,
“‘“and what I have planted I am uprooting
“‘“—the entire land.
“‘“But you are seeking
great things for yourself.
“‘“Stop seeking such things.
“‘For I am about to bring
a calamity on all flesh,”
“‘declares Jehovah, “and wherever you may go,
I will grant you your life as a spoil.”’”
What reason did Jehovah give
for Baruch’s feelings?
It was not the assignment itself
or even his circumstances.
In verse 5, Jehovah said:
“You are seeking great things for yourself.”
Think about that.
It was Baruch’s own view
of what seemed great or most important.
For a time, he was focused
on “seeking great things” for himself.
What do you think
those “great things” could have been?
Was it a desire for fame or prestige?
Was he sensing
that his support for God’s prophet
was putting at risk his position and career?
Or did the “great things”
have to do with getting more money,
property, or some material possessions?
We don’t know,
but Baruch knew what they were.
And Jehovah’s counsel was clear:
“Stop seeking such things.”
It seems Baruch
took Jehovah’s counsel to heart.
I imagine him reasoning something like this:
‘Jehovah knows my thoughts and feelings.
‘Have I really been seeking
great things for myself?
‘It’s true.
‘Jehovah is always right.
‘My desires got the better of me,
‘and I was so distressed!
‘But Jehovah is kindly telling me:
“Baruch, be realistic.
‘“A divine judgment is coming.
‘Everything that seems so stable
will be uprooted.”
‘Material things, property,
money, or a prominent career
‘—it’s all temporary.
‘Seeking those things is dangerous.
‘Jehovah wants me and others
‘to survive the coming calamity.
‘And that’s what I want.
I need to get back to seeking
great things for Jehovah!’
Well, that’s just a possibility
of how Baruch might have been thinking.
But did he accept and follow the counsel?
Yes!
During the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem,
about 17 years later,
Baruch appears again in the inspired record,
supporting Jeremiah.
And though many others died
during the catastrophic
destruction of Jerusalem,
Baruch and Jeremiah survived.
Baruch’s humble response
to Jehovah’s counsel
saved his life.
And such a response to divine counsel
can do the same for us.
I’m sure, as you think more about Baruch,
you’ll see other ways
we can benefit from his example.
But let’s briefly discuss
one particular challenge that some of us
might be facing right now
and how Baruch’s experience can help.
The challenge:
being balanced while providing materially
for ourselves and our families.
In today’s world,
many people
are “seeking great things” for themselves
as they pursue
secular education and secular work.
Many believe that the key to success
and the key
to their and their family’s happiness
involves money
and getting more material things,
or a “resting-place,”
in this system of things.
Such thinking could influence us.
If you’re a family head, consider Chibisa.
He’s a brother in Malawi
who, along with his wife and seven children,
was doing well spiritually.
However, at one point,
they faced financial problems.
At times, there was not enough money
to buy food for each day.
How stressful!
Like many others, Chibisa decided
to go to South Africa to find work.
That was a personal decision.
But was it wise?
Looking back, Chibisa said this:
“This affected me spiritually
“because I did not know the language,
“I was unable to preach,
and I did not benefit from the meetings.
“Being so far from my family
“caused me to neglect
my responsibility as a family head.
“As a result,
my family grew weak spiritually
“and we all missed each other very much.
“I realized that I had made
a wrong decision going abroad.
My conscience started to trouble me greatly.”
You parents must also make personal decisions
about secular education for your children.
Naturally, you want them
to get a good education.
But you have to think carefully
about potential dangers.
For example, in some countries,
parents send their young children
away to boarding schools.
The March 15, 1997, issue of The Watchtower
discussed the Scriptural principles involved
and related a number of experiences
highlighting the dangers.
A brother named Clement said
that before going away to boarding school,
he loved the truth
and enjoyed participating in the ministry,
in family worship, and at meetings.
“However,” he said,
“once I went into boarding school
at the age of 14,
“I left the truth completely.
“Throughout the five years
I spent in boarding school,
“I never attended meetings.
“As a result of bad company,
I got involved with drugs,
smoking, and heavy drinking.”
Let’s consider one more situation.
You younger Christians approaching adulthood
must make decisions involving
education and employment.
There may be many choices.
But which ones will help you
live up to your dedication to Jehovah?
One sister said this:
“As a baptized Witness,
I had read and heard
“about the dangers
of pursuing university education,
“but I dismissed such warnings.
I thought the counsel did not apply to me.”
Well, our sister
made her personal choice in the matter.
But was it a wise one?
She continues:
“Studying for my courses
took so much time and effort
“that I was too busy
“to linger in prayer to Jehovah
the way I used to,
“too exhausted to enjoy
Bible discussions with others,
“and too tired
to prepare well for the meetings.
“Thankfully, once I realized
that being immersed in higher education
“was damaging my relationship with Jehovah,
“I knew I had to stop.
And I did.”
Of what do these
real-life examples remind us?
In Satan’s system of things,
we will face challenges
that test our determination
to put Jehovah’s will first in our lives.
Like Baruch,
personal desires could distract us.
If that ever happens,
we need to take quick action
to correct our viewpoint, as did Baruch.
Happily, through the Bible
and spiritual instruction
from the faithful slave,
Jehovah helps us make
better choices in personal areas of life,
such as those involving
secular education and secular work.
At Psalm 32:8, he promises:
“I will give you insight
and instruct you in the way you should go.
I will give you advice with my eye upon you.”
We are wise to seek out
such advice by doing research,
by talking to mature Christians,
and then applying such counsel.
Chibisa did that.
After moving to South Africa,
his conscience started bothering him
and he remembered the example of Baruch.
Chibisa said this:
“Baruch may have wanted
to pursue material riches as I had.
“When he was helped, he returned.
“I decided then to put Jehovah in first place
“instead of searching for material things.
“So I started to make changes to go home
and help my family spiritually.
“When I left South Africa
and reached the border of Malawi . . . ,
“I felt great happiness in my heart,
“and I am still happy . . .
“Studying the Bible has helped me.
“We still encounter financial problems,
“but I remember that in Satan’s world,
“there is nowhere we can go
and have no problems. . . .
“My family is progressing spiritually.
“And this makes me very happy,
because my relationship
with Jehovah is strong.”
Like Baruch,
Chibisa was humble and courageous.
And we know those same qualities
characterize you, brothers and sisters!
So when Jehovah, our loving Father,
gives us timely advice,
as he did to his close friend Baruch,
let’s take it to heart.
Let’s do whatever it takes
to make sure we and our families
continue “seeking first the Kingdom
and [God’s] righteousness.”
And never forget,
as we continue to seek
great things for Jehovah,
he’ll continue to do great things
for us and our families!
Yes, it’s his blessing
that makes us truly rich,
“and he adds no pain with it.”